{"text": "Okay, good afternoon everyone. My name is Nathan Downs. I'm sorry about the mask. I do have to wear the mask at least this week as we all do while we're on campus. I'll be looking after you this semester for algebra and calculus. So what we're gonna cover are two things. We're gonna cover a calculus strand and an algebra strand. They're both very detailed. So expect to do a lot of work in this course. Okay, so there's quite a lot that we need to cover and I want to explain a few things about getting started. So if I share this one first on here, you can see what we're doing. Share. So we're gonna look at scalars and vectors today to get started in our course, but I wanna go through some administrative matters so you're familiar with that as well. We'll start here. We're gonna cover our scalars and vectors, but we're gonna spend a little bit of time on administrative matters. My name is Nathan Downs. If you need to contact me, you can find me on D108D. I'm there most days, particularly on Tuesdays and Wednesdays. You can drop in and see me at those times there, or if you need to make an appointment, just email me and we can set one up and we'll talk to you at that stage. Email is a very good way of contacting me, particularly on the course forum. I monitor those every weekday so I'm able to get back to you as often as possible. With getting started in this course, you probably have a lot of questions. Again, you need to log into the study desk. Make sure that you check that very frequently. That's where you'll get the materials. Okay, so Kurt Holm, can you please use your microphone? Please? There we are. Okay, so for this course, it is a textbook course. It's a course written around the textbook journals. Now, there are several versions of this textbook, and every second year, a new version of the textbook comes out. So I do not mind which version you use. You should be right if you go way back to the fourth edition. The only thing that changes with the text are the page numbers. There's slight differences in the page numbers, but the section numbers and the numbers that you'll be referring to or questions are generally the same. So you can get away with using a few page differences here and there. What you will need to do this material really are the first three things I've listed here. You'll need the course study book, which you can get from the study desk, which I'm going to show you in a moment, and you will need the textbook. Every week, you'll see there are two strands, the algebra strand and the calculus strand. Make sure you cover the sections per week to stay up to date. So if you look at the beginning of the course, there's quite a bit that we have to do already. In respect to what you have to do for the course, you have to do a silent. Let me make this clear. There are no exams. There is no exam. This course has been running for more than 30 years, and this is the first time it's been offered without an exam. Okay? So you have a very good opportunity to do well. All of your material is available from day one. It's all up there now. A lot of the time when we were doing exams previously, you wanted to know what was going to be on the exam, but you know exactly what's going to be there. You have to do four assignments. The first assignment is an online quiz. The remaining three are written assignment tasks, and they're all explained and available from day one. So hopefully that will make things a little bit more straightforward this year. I just noticed a mistake as well. Please change this in here. Okay. My pen. Not going to write on the screen. View on the full screen. That makes it really difficult. My pen doesn't work. There we go. So you can see the first one there. It says the tutorials are from 2 to 4 p.m. on Thursdays. They're with Professor Yuri Stepanovich. Can you please change that room number? It's not in W414. We are now. It's going to be in D109. Okay, that's very important. So if you have a term on Thursday, make sure to go to D109. I'll be running two sessions during the week. An introduction to algebra, an introduction to calculus to get you started every week. They all go for two hours per session. All 2022 sessions will be recorded. This one is being recorded right now and it will be available this afternoon or tomorrow morning. And it will be available on your course study desk under Panopto. So that means it's not going to be available under this week. You have to go to the left of the course under a section called Panopto and you'll find your course recordings there. So please give me a little bit of time to get those ready. All your study materials, all your past lecture recordings are available from previous years if you want to work ahead. I'm changing the lecture notes a little bit. They're published here and I'm rewriting them so they might change a little bit. So be aware of that. Work tutorial solutions, their tutorials are also available from day one. Now that's fully worked solutions. So your tutorials, I have the textbook and they're all available on the study desk as well. I'm going to show you where they are so you're familiar with everything. We share on this one. Back to the study desk here. Okay, study desk. Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. So I share on this one. Share on the study desk. Hopefully you can see that at home. That's what your study desk looks like. If I switch my role to that of a student, it'll look more like your study desk. It looks something like that. You can see there's your study book and your study schedule. You need to work with those very importantly. Make sure you get the study schedule. It'll tell you what to do every week. Okay, so that will list sections of the textbook that you need to work through. Okay, so in week one, we've got the algebra. We're going to study sections of the text 1.13 to 1.15. And when we get to functions, we're going to do 4.13 to 4.14. That's this week only. So you can see there's quite a lot involved there. The next thing that you need to see, if I go back on there, is your weekly materials. So all the weekly materials are up from day one. We're going to do two algebra sessions. I'm going to combine them into one session, which will take up to two hours during the week. And there are previously two calculus sessions that are available now. I'll combine them into one two-hour session as well. Okay. Now, the 2022 slides, as I make them, will become available every week. And they're available for you to download before the lecture time, even though they're not called lectures anymore. These are engaged sessions. Your tutorials are all out of the text. And here's what your tutorials are. So this week, you have to look at section 4.2.7, Havagard question number 13, question 19, 4.2.9, question 33. After you've done that, for your calculus tutorial, you'll do 2.2, question 1A, 2.2.5, question 10C, et cetera. Now, the tutorials, as I said, are going to be run on Thursdays. They'll be run with Eerie Live and online, like I'm doing now. You're welcome to do them beforehand, or you can do them live in a two-hour session. It doesn't matter. You have all the work examples for every one of those questions there. If you're using a slightly different version of the text, then the numbers will be more or less the same. The pages might change a little bit, which is why I have a list of page numbers. A couple of other things. So again, when this recording is available, it'll be on the left side of the screen. It will not be under that section. That goes on as it is for every week, as we've got it listed. It'll take you all the way through to the end of the course. Okay? So that's how the course runs. This is the important thing. I'm going to talk about the assessment. Okay? So with the assessment, you've got four assessment items. You can find them under here. They're all about the map. You can start the first quiz today if you want to. Don't be worried about it. Once you click on it, it won't save your answers, and that's the end of it. You can click on it many times. I recommend you do the assignment on paper, and then copy your answers up when you're ready. But this quiz is due very soon. It's due on the 7th of March. That's right, the 8th of March, which is three weeks' time, and it will test your knowledge on the first two weeks of the course. Okay? So I won't be giving extension to that because it's short answer only. You don't need any work. You just need to provide your answer. It's not two hours, okay? But it will test the first two weeks. With that quiz, it is not multi-choice. You have to provide a short answer, which is why I recommend you do the short answers on paper first. All right? I want to show you something with this quiz. When you click on it, and you start or reattempt it, you'll have to enter answers. They're not just one-word answers. So you might say you want to put in pi, but you have to type in pi on two. And see how I type? It says your answer will be interpreted as pi on two. That is what the computer expects your answer to be. Okay? Now, there'll be no rounding. When we deal with radian measure, you'll be using pi, and you'll be using fractions like this. I don't want people to get upset about typing in things like this. If I ask you to do radian measure, I'll give you an example in the question that says type pi like pi, like that. But I want you to practice that. It's not so good, okay? It's not so good. So if you're happy with that, then you go to the next page. How do you do things like square root? You have to do a search. You have to type things like sqrt. Whoops, broke it. And root proof. Your answer will be interpreted as root proof. Now, there's probably a few things you need to be aware of. Pi is pi on when you're going to do radian measure. Square root is sqrt, sqrt, bracket. If you want to do a multiply, you write it with a star. I want to put in 2x. I say 2 times x. It will be interpreted as 2 times x. Okay? So these are short answers, not multi-choice. You need to be able to provide a written solution like that. I think that's covered all the complexity. Slash, divide, star, multiply, sqrt, square root, pi, pi. And you should be all right. Okay? Your answers will not be saved until you get to the end of the quiz. When you get to the end of the quiz, it will say submit all when you're happy. And you write the answer after you've done your 20 questions. So that's what I mean by nothing is saved until you hit submit all. You can come back as many times as you like. But I recommend not leaving this until five minutes before it's due on the 8th and trying to enter it then. Because you've got to be sure you type in the correct thing that you want. Okay? So is that all right? So no multi-choice. I want you to enter your answers. That's a little bit complex. All right. Very good. We're going back to this one. Normal full-span. Okay. Ready? Oh, that's a good slide, isn't it? Yes, I'm ready. with his two getting ready to go, Okay. So there we go. Okay. Okay. So there it is back again. So we share on here, share on the screen. So hopefully that will explain the course delivery, those materials. Okay. So as you can see, the course has got quite a lot of material in it that we need to cover. And there's your course outline for the semester. So this way you can easily study those sections. You can follow that through in your textbook. For the assessment, again, there's only those four assignments, due dates are all there. They're also available on the study desk. The first quiz, because it's your first attempt, is only worth 10%. The ones that are up there are worth 30% each. They'll be marked as they go. There is no exam. Okay. But with the written assignments, what you have to do with those is you need to provide fully worked answers. You need to scan those assignments and upload them to the study desk, which is directly below each assignment. So hopefully that's straightforward. So that covers the content of what we need to do. The opening matters. Are there any questions before I move on? Everything's straightforward enough? Everything's reasonable? Not too bad? Very good. Okay. So for the course, there's quite a lot we have to do. The first thing we've got to look at are vectors. Okay? So if we have vectors in two-dimensional space, I represent a vector here by a line and an arrow. The line is the magnitude of the vector. The arrow tells me the direction of that vector. That vector has an infinite number of components, but often we want its rectangular components. So in other words, a component in the x direction and the component in the y direction. How do we work out how long that vector is? That vector is calculated using Pythagoras' theorem. So that's called the magnitude of the vector, and it's written like that there. Okay? So the magnitude of r is the square root of the x component squared and the y component squared. How do I find out its direction? Well, it depends on how you draw on those axes. So I often define its direction using an angle theta. So the direction of this one here is the angle that has a tan ratio of y to x. Okay? So that would be an angle in degrees, or I might give that angle in radians if I was asked. So that's a two-dimensional vector. If we are going to do three-dimensional vectors now, if you want to look at a three-dimensional vector and see what they look like, you can use those two applications on the screen there. I'm not going to show them to you because they're not part of the USQ package, but you can access them for free online. And they're really useful if you want to be able to see what a vector looks like in 3D space. Okay? So you can draw a point by using a capital. You can draw a vector by using a smaller case letter, and you can draw a line as shown there. But these are vectors in 2D space. We have to use our right hand to see what a vector might look like in 3D space, not our left hand. So by right hand, we've got the x, y, and our thumb points in the z. And you've got to try and imagine what this vector might look like in three-dimensional space, which is where GeoGebra can be really quite useful. What I've shown here is a component form of a vector. So in component form, we say that the point A1, A2, A3, and it's an ordered triple, where A1 is the x coordinate, A2 is the y coordinate, and A3 is the z coordinate, gives the position of that vector in 3D space, if I draw it from the origin, 0, 0, 0. So this component form is often called a position vector. But that vector is exactly the same if I move it around and point it in the same direction anywhere in space. It doesn't necessarily have to be located at the origin. If I added that vector to itself, the second one would be called a displacement vector. And when we add vectors, you'll see we add them head to tail. And that's what we're going to do now. So if I have the coordinates of a point P, they indicate the displacement from the origin, and there it is in its component form. So we have an x direction, a y direction, and a z direction. And the length of that vector is equal to every component squared, summed together, take the square root. And it's an application of the point vector."}{"text": "Pythagoras' theorem. So we need to know how to calculate the magnitude of a vector. Okay, so, oh, I'm writing again. So the vector OP is a position vector. When I write OP, I can write the line underneath the side of the vector. Or I could say OP like this, OP, O, O, P, with an arrow on top, and it says it's a vector. That's a vector from the point O ending at P. If it was PO, it would be a vector starting at P and going up. All right? So there's a vector in its component form. It can be written like that there, and it has that magnitude. So we know these vectors have an X coordinate, a Y coordinate, and a Z coordinate, and we can use those. All right? Why is it that the magnitude of the vector is the sum of all the components squared? It's just an application of Pythagoras' theorem. So if you look at this diagram here on the XY plane, you can see I've got an X component and a Y component of BX and BY. The dotted line is shown here. Okay? The length of that line is Pythagoras' theorem, just the square root of BX squared plus BY squared. But if I want the magnitude of the black line V, can you see how all I've got to do is take this line here, this line here, and that one there, and make it into a triangle? So the magnitude of that line there is going to be the square of BX squared plus BY squared square root, which is just BX squared plus BY squared plus VZ squared square root. Okay? And that's where it comes from. So we use that there to show that the magnitude of that vector is the sum of each of the X, Y, and Z components squared together. It's just an application of Pythagoras. And from that, we can also look at what we call the direction cosines. So if a vector in 3D space has got three components, then it also has three direction cosines. Now, the direction cosines are the cosine ratio of each component with respect to the vector itself. So we often call these alpha, beta, and gamma. There's one that I haven't fitted on there. It's beta, which is in here. Little tiny angle in there. Okay? So because this here makes a right angle triangle. Okay? And I can see that the coast of this one here is that length, or that length there. So the coast of alpha is the ratio of BX to the magnitude itself. That's called the direction cosine in the X direction. If I want to find the cosine of BY with respect to V, that's the direction cosine for the Y axis. And the direction cosine for the Z axis is a ratio of BZ to V for the cosine of gamma. Okay? So what we can do with those direction cosines is that we can square each of them if we wanted to. So the coast of alpha is equal to BX on V, the coast of beta is BY on V, and the coast of gamma is VZ on V. If I were to square each of those, wouldn't it have the coast of alpha squared plus the cosine of beta squared plus the cosine of gamma squared, which would equal VY on V squared plus VX on V squared plus VZ on V squared. And if I looked at them and added them up, wouldn't I have V squared plus BY squared plus V squared on V squared? Because they're all in a common denominator of V squared, which is one. Okay? Which is one. Okay? So if we look at each of them, we can say that the coast of alpha squared plus the coast of beta squared plus the coast of gamma squared will equal one. Now, there are two ways we can add vectors graphically. So we've seen them in 3D space. We need to know how to add them using a parallelogram, and we need to know how to add them using a vector tile method. If I use a vector addition to a parallelogram method, I can add V, I can add A to B like this, add them together, where they start from the same point. But I have to replace B and put it across to the other side of A to make a parallelogram, and A has to be translated up. Finish that parallelogram like this. So we can add them, make a parallelogram, and if I connect the two, A plus B is the vector sum. That's adding vectors graphically using a parallelogram. Now, looking at that, that's one way, but another way of adding vectors is just adding them head to tile. Okay? So if I add vectors head to tile, A plus B, I can put B at the end of A, head to tile, head to tile, and if I connect from the original point to the end, that there is the result. Okay? So A, the vector A plus B, is equal to the sum of A and B in 3D space, or 3D space, just like that there. The order of a vector sum is not important. I could do A plus B, I could do B plus A, and I still get the same result. Okay? So adding vectors in any order doesn't matter. It's different, however, when we do a vector addition to scalar addition. If I wanted to add these up and then we just scale the lengths of how far A is and what is the length of B, then the sum would be different. Okay? Because when I add these up as vectors, I have a component in the X for this one, and a component in the X for that one. And then I have a component in the Y for this vector, and a component in the Y for this one. Which, when I add them together, gives me this result here. We notice that that result there is actually shorter than that one. Okay? So scalar addition does not mean that the magnitude of A plus the magnitude of B is the magnitude of A plus B. Okay? It's different. You have to add up the respective components. So if that there is scalar addition, we can add them using parallelogram method, or we can add them using a header title. We need to know how to multiply vectors. And we're going to spend a little bit of time multiplying vectors this week and next week. But to start a vector multiplication, we need to see what multiplying by a scalar does. In other words, if I have a vector which has components in X, Y, and Z, and I multiply it by a scalar of 3, 4, 5, what does that do? Well, if the scalar, which I defined as the constant K here, has a magnitude that is greater than 1, the vector gets bigger. Okay? So if I have 3 times a vector, 3 times a vector which has a component in the X, Y, and Z, I just multiply every respective component out and it becomes 3, 0, and 6. Okay? So that's scalar multiplication. You can see that if the constant is less than 1, the vector actually gets smaller. What if it was a third? Multiply by 1, 0, 2. It'd be 1, 3, 0, 2, 3, 3, 3, 3. Okay? The last two points I make here is if that constant K is a positive, the vector points in the same direction. If it's negative, it points in the opposite direction. Okay? As an example, if we look at these here, draw the vector B, which is 2A. So to draw that vector B, I have to repeat it and multiply it by 2, and it becomes twice as long. Similarly, I've had to draw the vector negative A, it points in the opposite direction. Okay? So that's vector addition, head to tail, or 3 parallelogram addition. To subtract a vector, we have to subtract or add respective components, but if we're subtracting, then we subtract respective components. So if I have A take B, isn't that the same as saying A plus the negative of B? Okay? So a vector subtraction is a special type of addition. It's the addition of a negative vector. Okay? So what we have to do is point that vector in the opposite direction and then add them together. So if I had to do A and I wanted to subtract B, I wouldn't draw B at the end of A, I would draw it at the end of A but pointing in the exact opposite direction because it's adding the negative of B. So if we add that one on, there's the result of A take B. Now, the thing that we notice about vector subtraction is the order is important. Unlike vector addition, we can add two vectors together and the order doesn't matter. Okay? But if I had to subtract A from B, I get a different result. So if I was at B and I wanted to subtract A, as an example, if I subtract A, notice that the result points in the exact opposite direction of A take B. Okay? So when we subtract vectors, the order of the subtraction is important. All right? So consider the subtraction of the vector here. If I have B take A, it's the same as B plus a negative of A. And what we would do is, like I've shown there, B, I have to add on A in the exact opposite direction. And the result is from the beginning to the end there, and there's B take A, but notice it points in the opposite direction. Okay? So that's vector subtraction. So calculating the displacement vector, these are the sort of questions we now need to be able to calculate. How do we calculate how far it takes to move from one point to get to another point? We've got to calculate a displacement to go from the end of the first vector to the next vector. So displacement vectors use vector subtraction. And when you have to calculate a displacement vector, it's always the end point minus the beginning point. So if I had to calculate the displacement of moving from point one, four, two in three-dimensional space, and I had to get to the point three, two, three, I do Q take P. I always do the end point minus the start point. Okay? So the displacement in doing that first exercise there is, if I want a displacement moving from P, if I want to go from P through to Q, like that, it's always Q take P. If I want to go from Q to P, it'd be the opposite way around. So Q take P there is going to equal three, three, two, three, minus one, four, two. So that then is equal to, when you subtract or add vectors, you do respective components. So it's three take one, which is two. Three take one, which is two. Three take one, which is two. And then I do four take two, which is two. And I do two take three, which is negative one. So that means that I should be able to go from point P, which is three, two, three, add on two, and then I'll get to the next point. Oops, I made a mistake there. So one minus three is negative two. Negative two. So when I subtract vectors, end point minus the beginning point. Okay? So when I add those together, I should end up at the finishing point. So if, however, I have to add displacement to a point U, what I do is I do U, U, and I add on one, negative one, two, which would be four, five, three. And I have to add on the point one minus one, two. This is then equal to five. Five minus one is equal to four. Four and three plus two is equal to five. I'll add them all at once. Okay? So in calculating the displacement vector, it's the last point minus the first point. And if I have to add the displacement vector, I add them all with respect to components. All right? Okay. So that is adding and subtracting vectors. What if I have to look at vectors as a, in another direction, not as components, but as a sum of unit vectors. A unit vector is a vector that has a magnitude of one. Okay? And a unit vector is calculated as the magnitude of the vector. It's calculated as the vector divided by its magnitude. Whatever the vector point's in, divided by how long it is. Okay? So if I have some vector in three-dimensional space, A1, A2, A3, I can say that that vector, A, which is A1, A2, A3, could be written as a vector A1, zero, zero, plus a vector zero, A2, and the Y zero, plus a vector three, zero, zero, A3. Now, I can take that coefficient out, and I'd be left with A1, lots of one, zero, zero. It's a scalar multiplication of a special vector that has a length one, zero, zero. Okay? Because if I multiply A1 by one, don't I get A1 in the direction of X? And then if I take out A2 for the second component, don't I have A2 multiplied by a special direction in the direction Y? And if I take out A3, don't I have a vector that's multiplied in a special direction of Z? Okay? So these special vectors here are called unit vectors. Okay? So the unit vectors of I, which is a special vector that points along the X axis, and it's equal to A1, lots of one, zero, zero. If I have the special vector J, it's a unit vector that moves along the direction of the Y axis, has a length of one, as shown in purple. And the vector K is a unit vector that moves along the Z axis that has a magnitude of one. So what we have, therefore, is two ways of representing a vector. So if I have a vector in component form, as an example, three, two, minus three, what I could say is that vector is also three multiplied by a special vector in the Y direction. Okay? But I don't write comma, I say plus. Because we know if we have three, we've got to go one, two, three units this way. We've got to go two units in the Y and minus three down and get my result. So couldn't I write it as three I plus two J minus three? Okay. So there's two ways you can write the vector. You can write it in its component form, or you could write it in its I, J, and K form. And what we'll do is we'll switch between both of them. Okay? Except this one here is a vector that has three lots of the unit I plus two lots of the unit of the unit vector J minus three lots of the unit vector K. All right? So if I have a vector in 3D space, how do I represent it as a vector that points in the exact same direction, but only has a magnitude of one? What I have to do is take that vector and divide it by its length. Okay? Because something divided by itself is one. So if I take every one of the components and divide by their length, I get a vector that points in the, um, but has a length of one. For example, if I have the vector S, if I have the vector S here, like that, then that vector, that vector S, has a corresponding vector that points in the exact same direction, but only has a length of one. Okay? So the way that we get the vector that points in the exact same direction is you divide it by its respective magnitude. This is a very important concept. And we're going to play with that in a moment. So as an introduction to vectors, we know how to add vectors. We add them head to tail, and we add respective components. We can multiply a vector by a scalar, which extends it or turns it in a different direction. And what we can also do is we can multiply. And when we multiply vectors together, instead of just multiplying it by a scalar for each respective component, what if we multiply a vector by a vector? All right? And these are the next two concepts we're going to look at. The first concept is to look at what's called the dot product. That's when I multiply a vector by another vector, and I use a dot to show the multiplication. If I multiply a vector by another vector in what's called the dot product, it's also called a scalar product, because the result is not another vector. The result is a scalar component. Okay? So if I have a dot b, it actually means how much of a points in the direction of b multiplied by the length of b. And it's really easy to calculate. If I have two vectors in component form, then all I have to do is multiply them by a scalar."}{"text": "have to do is I have to take the vector and multiply it by every respective component and sum them together. Okay, so if I have a vector and notice that I've used bold to write my vectors here. You can't write bold when you write them down so you use an arrow. You use an arrow above it. Okay, so if I have two vectors what I do for example of this one was three two one this was one two one as an example. How would I find the dot product of those two? Multiply respective components. So what you do is you go three the first one multiplied by the first one of the second. Okay, you then have to add that to two by two. Okay, and then I then have to add that to one by one. And the result is a scalar isn't it? It's going to be three plus four plus one which is eight. And what that eight means is that if I have the vector three two one in 3d space there are eight units that point in the direction of the vector b when I project it onto it and multiply by its length and what I'll show you is the next slide what I mean by that. So before I get there to find the scalar product it's pretty straightforward you have to multiply respective components and add them together. And if I have to find the dot product of two vectors a and b all I have to do is do how much of a projects on the b multiplied by the length of b. Okay, so what I mean by doing a dot product so I have a I'm saying how much of a projects onto b which is this amount here which is the magnitude of a cos theta but I then multiply by its length. So what's in the box must be known. We say that the angle between two vectors the angle between two vectors is their dot product a dot b divided by their respective magnitudes. Okay, so that's very important. So the cosine of the angle between two vectors is a dot b over the magnitude of a by the magnitude of b. Now rearranging that I can see that a dot b on its own will be equal to the cosine of theta multiplied by a multiplied by b. Now this a cos theta is the scalar projection of how much of a acts in the direction of b. It's a component how much of that acts in that direction. And if I multiply by the length of b I've found the dot product. Okay, so what this is called then is an orthogonal projection. The orthogonal projection is how much of a projects onto b. Okay, and it is calculated as a the mag of a by the cosine of the angle theta. But if I rearrange this equation and if I bring that to that side I can see that the mag of a by the cosine of theta is equal to a dot b over the mag of b. But this part here b over the mag of b is a special thing it's called the unit vector b hat. Okay, so in short to find the scalar component of a in the direction of b you have to do what's in the box here. You have to do a dot b hat. Okay, now that is a scalar. That's a scalar projection of a onto b. So it's how long or how much of a acts in the direction of b. That's not a vector. Okay, if I want to turn this into a vector I have to multiply it by the unit vector that acts in the same direction. And the unit vector that acts in the same direction is b hat. So if the scalar projection, the orthogonal projection of a onto b is a dot b hat, a dot b hat multiplied by b hat is the vector projection of a onto b. Okay, so the vector projection of a onto b is how much of a acts in the direction of b as a scalar. And that component is a scalar because it's a multiplied by b hat, which is a scalar component, multiplied by the unit vector that points in the direction of b. So we need to be able to do two things here. We need to be able to work out what the scalar component of a is in the direction of b and also know how to represent that as a vector. So the scalar component is a dot b hat and notice what I've done here. It's a dot b hat where b hat points in the direction of what you want to project onto. If I did b dot a hat I would be projecting in this direction and I'm projecting b onto a. Okay, so the b hat tells you which vector you're projecting onto. But remember when we do this a dot b hat it is only a scalar component. It's just a length. If I want that as a vector I have to multiply by the unit vector here. So as an example, before we get to that, one more thing. If I want to know what the orthogonal projection of a vector is, then I need to know two components. In other words, I want to know this p here. If I want to know what the component of the vector a is that is orthogonal to b, where orthogonal means it right angles, then the way I calculate that is using vector maths. Isn't it just equal to a minus this component here, that vector there? Because if I do a minus this one, which means it points in that direction, haven't I found the length p? Okay, so the component that is orthogonal to the vector b from a is calculated as the vector a as a vector minus the vector projection of a onto b. Because it's a vector subtraction, it's a minus the component of a in that direction, that acts in the direction of b as a vector. Okay, one more thing about notation with projections. If I write the projection of a onto b, I write it that way. You always write it with the big letter first. So if I'm doing a projection of a onto the vector b, if it was b, the little a would mean I'm going the other direction. Okay, so as an example, what you need to be able to do are problems like this. Consider the two vectors a and b, there should be a comma in there. Find the projection of a onto b. Now that's the vector component, so what you're asking me for is what is that vector there? So after I find that, I then find the component of a that is orthogonal to b. So in other words, find b. So remember the process. How do I find how much of a acts in the direction of b? It's always a dotted in the direction that you want to go, a b hat. So we need to work out b hat. How do we work out b hat? If b is the vector in component form 2, 4, minus 1, 2, 4, minus 1, how do I find what the b hat is? b hat is 2, 4, 1, divided by its magnitude. Now its magnitude is each of the components squared square root, so that's equal to 2 squared plus 4 squared plus negative 1 squared. Okay, now it's really hard writing on this because I can't touch the screen at the same time. So 2 squared is 4, 4 squared is 16, so it's root 21. So what I've got is, let me use this pen, so I've got 2, 4, 1 over root 21. Now that root 21 is 1 over root 21. It's a scalar component of this entire vector. So the unit vector is actually 2 over root 21, 4 over root 21, and 1 over root 21, negative 1 actually, because it was 2, 4, negative 1. So I've found the vector b hat. So again, how do I find the unit vector? It's every component divided by the magnitude of the vector on each component. So that's a vector that points in the direction of b, but is only one level. After I've done that, I can do a b hat. Okay, a dot b hat. a dot b hat is equal to 1, 1, 4, 2, and I'm going to dot that with this unit vector that I've just found, which was 2 over root 21, 4 over root 21, and negative 1 over root 21. So when I do the dot product, I have to multiply respective components and add them together. 1 by that one is equal to 2 over root 21 plus 4 of this one when I add them together. So it's going to be 4 by 4, which is 16 root 21. And then I'm going to have 2 plots of that one there. So it's minus 2 root 21. Okay, now this should be a scalar because it is a dot product. So they're all on a common denominator. 2 plus 16 is 18 minus 2 takes me back to 16. So I'm saying 16 root 21 is how long a is when I project it onto b, but that's just a scalar. Makes sense? So the projection of a onto b is 16 root 21's long. But I don't want that. I want the actual projection of a in the direction of b. So what do I have to do with that scalar? I now have to take that scalar, I have to take the scalar, anyway, 16 root 21's and I have to multiply it by the unit vector that points in that direction to turn that into a vector. And that unit vector again was 2 root 21's, 4 root 21's and it was neg 1 root 21's. Like that there. And I multiply them out and then I found the projection. Now squishing that all up there, so what I've actually got then is 32 root 21's. Then for the first component, 16 4's are equal to 64 root 21's and 16 by 1 is negative 16 root 21's. So can you see the difference? This here is the scalar component that acts in the direction of b. When I multiply it by b hat, it becomes a vector and that is the projection of a in the direction of b. It's 32 root 41's in the i, it's 64 root 21's in the j and minus 16 root 21's in the y. So how then do I find the component that is orthogonal to b? What I have to do is do a and I have to multiply and I have to subtract this vector here because what I'll end up with a vector subtraction is the vector b. So to finish the problem off, to find the component that is orthogonal to b, what I have to do is a minus the projection of a in the direction of b. So again a is a vector so it's 1, 4, 2 in component form, minus 32 root 21's, 64 root 21's and negative 16 root 21's like that there. Okay and that's it for that component. Makes sense? So that there is an introduction to algebra and what we're going to do in the first week which is the scalar projection and then next week we'll do the, sorry the scalar or the dot product. Next week we'll do the cross product. Okay so that would be the conclusion of this one. Answer to all your questions? All right good stuff. Okay that's it. Any questions at home? Very good."}